All right.
To wrap up this session and give you some experience at the concepts we've been talking about, namely
the Doppler shift, what I thought would be a good idea is to run through an example problem where you
design your own radar system.
It's going to be a simplified one and also work through some of the problems you might encounter when
trying to execute it and implement it in the real world.
OK, so for the problem statement, for this example problem, we're going to take a look at Terrance
and Phillip.
Terrance is going to try and monitor the traffic using a radar gun that you're going to design, and
he's going to try assess the velocity of Philip riding in his car away from him.
So the problem statement says to monitor the traffic.
Terrence designed a radar gun that emits a signal with a frequency, if not a 36 gigahertz.
You decide that you're going to send out this signal, it's going to have that frequency.
And as we discussed previously, we want to fly out, hit the car, come back and measure the frequency
we obtain.
That's going to give us information regarding the velocity.
But the rest of the province states that when Philip flies by, parents is gone, receives the emitted
signal back with a frequency change.
We're going to measure the change in the frequency, the what the wave form that comes back.
We're going to get a delta of negative ten point three two kilohertz.
And what we want to figure out is how fast is Philip traveling when he's traveling away from parents?
Now, when you work through this problem and you're trying to design an algorithm for calculating the
velocity of the car that's speeding up, what you have to ask is what equation drives, what equation
do I use?
The first thing you're going to say is, well, parent or fill up is traveling in a car at a speed that
is Newtonian.
In a sense, it's not just the speed of light.
So can we or can we not get away of using a simplified non relativistic form of the Doppler shift equation?
Can we?
Yes, indeed we can, because he's going to be traveling very slow, and that's the justification for
using it.
We're getting high accuracy with the simplified non relativistic equation.
So that's the first equation we're going to use.
And that's a question we have to ask is how many times of the Doppler shift that phenomenon, that concept,
how many times is it applied?
Well, initially we shoot out a beam, then it's going to hit the car.
So we're going to have a Doppler shift that fill up actually seasonless car, but then it's going to
bounce back and come back.
And because he's traveling away, he's increasing the distance between them.
It's going to experience another Doppler shift.
Now what we talk about when running through Doppler shifts and radar in particular, that's the main
application we had in the section.
So we have to have a 280 opposite.
So it's important when you design your algorithm, you use this equation here for the non relativistic
Doppler shift, which accounts for the phenomenon twice.
All right, now that we have a general form of the equation, we're going to use for our algorithm.
Next, we want a question do we want a positive sign here or a negative sign, right?
Depending upon the situation at hand, whether the car is traveling away or traveling toward the radar
gun, we're going to get different effects arising right when it's traveling away.
That's increasing the wavelength, but decreasing the frequency right.
So when the the object is moving away from the source, we need to put a negative sign, right?
We want the frequency to be smaller, right, because it's not going to hit him as frequently when it's
traveling towards him.
We would need a positive sign.
So we've selected the correct equation here and now all we need to do is isolate the term that we're
interested in.
So where is it in the relative velocity of fill up the parents respect to his radar gun?
And what we could do is we could say, wait a second, the frequency of the beam with that comes back,
right?
We we we don't know that because our device is going to measure a change in frequency and that's typically
what you observe.
And a lot of radar guns when it's doing these computations.
So we have to convert this first to use the terms that we do have are givens and then we can isolate
the re the V relative and get a nice expression for what our radar gun should be computing once it gets
all these quantities back, OK?
So we know that f prime would be f not plus the change, right?
Because the change, the change Delta F not or Delta F, this is no different than the final, which
would be f prime minus f not only make that more pronounced for you.
So when you add that to f, not the f not cancel on your left with the f prime original.
So we're going to substitute in that equation here.
So f not you can literally just isolated f prime is equal to Delta F plus f not.
And then when you divide by.
Sky on the left right here.
We do that, we end up with this expression and now all you need to do is isolate the relatives.
So what we're going to do is we're going to subtract this already here.
We're going to take to the Yellow Sea over here.
So we end up with a one minus this term here, which is showing up in our final form right there.
And then we have to be row over sea over here.
All we need to do is multiply by sea over two.
That's how we get that guy.
And this is our final expression.
OK, so we've got this nice expression here.
And what's going to happen when we set up a signal?
It's going to bounce off.
It's kind of come back.
We're going to measure, we're going to measure the change in the frequency.
And then it's going to do a competition like this and display the last.
That's how radar guns in police cars actually work.
This is what they're doing behind the scene.
All you see is just the velocity, OK?
So it's a bit more complicated than that.
You know, you can't just have one single beam going on usually sends out like a cone.
So we get this wide spread, so it's easier to get a red signal back.
And there are some other problems that we're going to go through in the second part of this problem.
But this is an equation we could get right here now just for fun and just to emphasize that this equation
still is valid.
What I want to do is I also want to derive the same exact equation using a relativistic Doppler shift,
and then we're going to plug in numbers and see if there's any difference if we gain any kind of accuracy
by using a more complex and intricate form.
OK, so we're going to use a relativistic Doppler shift.
We still have to use a two way Doppler shift, and we have to use the form for the object moving away
from the source.
So in our previous videos, what we found is that that form is as follows.
And we can use our intuition to make sure that it is of the correct form.
So what we know is that if it's traveling away, the frequency is going to drop because the wavelength
is going to increase right.
We're increasing that distance.
So the same number of crest not hit this vehicle if it was stationary.
So the equation we get the f prime should be smaller than the original frequency.
And we see that happening because one minus the fraction making it smaller over one plus a fraction.
If you divide by that, it's making it smaller even more.
So this is the correct form that we want to use and we want to do is we want to get rid of this f prime,
just as we did previously.
Using this equation here again, we isolate f prime the Delta F plus f not ban.
Plug that baby in and divide by this f not over here.
We can multiply that by the OnePlus virale over sea to get this guy, and all we need to do is try and
isolate.
So you can see, you know, as many more lines.
It's a little bit more convoluted to get the expression we want, and it becomes even more convoluted
if we're doing a one way Doppler shift where we have the square roots, they sort of cancel out because
we have to apply it twice.
But you can see it's a bit more complex complex already.
So is a trade off in terms of increasing the complexity in order to get some more accuracy, right?
So it requires some more work.
Let's just chug along.
So what we need to do is we need to isolate the relevancy, and what we could do is initially we can
just multiply by sea on both sides, which I'm going to do now.
We think that got rid of that, get rid of that.
And what happens is when you multiply by sea on both sides, see times one, we were all see the sea
disappears.
And you just get something like that.
That's what we want to do, is basically be relative.
So what we can do is we want to pull the V relatives onto one side, so we add this guy over, so we
get one plus B relative times this frequency fraction as follows.
OK.
And then we also want to isolate the CS on the right side.
We have one see you want to bring this C over, so it becomes a minus.
So we get C times one minus C times the frequency ratio, which is that's false.
And then all that's left really is to divide by this big hunk of junk.
And we get the following so you can see this guy compared to that guy.
It's not as elegant.
We don't get as quick of a solution.
And furthermore, I programmed some radar algorithms, which are much more complex than this.
But this is extremely support.
You know, when you start getting a lot of fractions and divisions and so on and so forth, that has
the potential of introducing bugs introduced, introducing errors when you're actually trying to program
it.
So that comes at a cost, right?
You usually what you do is you program an algorithm and then you do testing to verify that it's operating
as expected.
That's good engineering.
That's good systems engineering, if you will.
So you have like a testing department and they would test all this information.
And if you find errors and if you have to test more things with a more convoluted equation that increases
your cost, and it also increases the chance for putting out a bad product.
And also your timeline?
OK.
So that's a trade off.
So you're real trading time, cost and potential defects by going with this more convoluted route.
OK.
This would be ideal if we get the accuracy that's I'm going to show you shortly.
OK, so we've got these two approaches now.
All we need to do is plug and chug, put in our information and see what kind of result we get.
So if we take our givens, which is the source frequency of thirty six gigahertz that we shoot out and
a change of negative ten point three two kilohertz and again, that makes sense because what it's going
further away, we're increasing the distance to half travel as a result, the frequency so we should
drop.
OK.
So taking that information and taking our form here for the non relativistic equation.
All I need to do is plug in shock.
So one minus ethanol plus Delta F. That's one minus 36 times tend to the night.
That's four gigahertz.
Minus ten thousand three hundred and twenty Hertz, four kilohertz.
Ten point three, two kilohertz and any divide by the original frequency of wave form, which is thirty
six points 10 to the ninth hertz.
And I just multiply by our speed of light three times Terminator two.
And when you do that, it's your favorite program or your calculator to three, your preference.
You plug and chug and you end up with the relative is equal to 43 meters per second.
So that's how fast a slope is going.
And you can see Terry here has a little smirk on his face because he's noticing he can give him a ticket.
So he's excited because he he got revenge on Philip for making him do all those annoying experiments,
right?
OK, so we got that result here.
He's going forty three meters per second.
And this is a pretty viable design for a radar gun rights.
Very similar simple radar system.
So yes, be proud of yourself.
You have designed your first radar system.
It's probably the simplest radar system you can buy in a consumer marketplace.
OK, so let's repeat the exact same calculation using the relativistic result.
So when we do that, we see that, you know, it's not as nice.
It's much more convoluted.
We got a ton of frickin fractions going on here, but all we need to do is take one minus f not plus
Delta F.
We got those guys their one minus f not plus Delta F, so three six times telling the truth hurts minus
ten thousand three hundred twenty hertz divided by the original frequency.
Thirty six to deny Hertz.
Then you divide all that junk by one plus thirty six.
The original frequency thirty six times to the ninth hertz plus Delta F, minus ten thousand three hundred
twenty hertz divided by the original frequency as follows thirty six gigahertz thirty six on Saturday
night Hertz.
And then you multiply by the speed of light the C right there, which is three times ten to the meters
per second.
And when you do that, plug and chug, what you end up with is low and behold.
It looks very similar, right?
We get forty three point zero zero zero zero zero six meters per second, so you see the difference
here and.
You know, you see this and you got you say, OK, that's a minimal difference, right?
This is essentially identical to this.
We put in all this work to get this more complex expression and equation and then really bias anything
right?
It can increase our time, our cost and the deficiencies in our final product by giving us no more additional
apps.
We don't need this accuracy because this, in essence, is pretty close to 43 meters per second.
If something was going 43 miles per seven miles per hour, that's how we usually measure things in the
United States standards.
You know, if you saw someone 40 miles per hour, you don't care if they're going that.
If they had that fraction in there, right, that's that's negligible, we don't care about that.
So you throw it out and generally radar systems with manmade targets.
That's why we use this.
This not an altruistic form.
It's more elegant.
It's simpler, and it expedites our path to the solution next.
What I want to do is I want to question what would happen if, let's say, Terrence starts shooting
off his.
And for some reason, he misses fill up.
Maybe there's clutter preventing him from reading his exact signal.
And as a result, he has to hop in a car and chase him in a cruiser and try and measure this while traveling
at a speed that is not stationary.
OK, let's jump to that next.